Feature/doc data mesh (#737)
smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake: blog/2023-09-17-data-mesh/2023-09-17-data-mesh.md

[Zhamak Dehghani](https://martinfowler.com/articles/data-mesh-principles.html)
and assess which key concepts it supports. 

Please note that we expect some familiarity with the Data Mesh principles to follow along.
There are plenty of resources (books from [O'Reilly](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/data-mesh/9781492092384/)
and [Manning](https://www.manning.com/books/data-mesh-in-action), 
[articles](https://martinfowler.com/articles/data-mesh-principles.html)
and [dedicated websites](https://www.datamesh-architecture.com/)) if you want to dive deeper into the topic.

## Domain Ownership
_Individual domains or business units are responsible for the data they generate and maintain, 
fostering a sense of ownership and accountability._

### Scale Out Complexity
With a Data Mesh, your data organization can scale out as the centralized data team gets reduced. 
With increased usage, you will have more data sources, more consumers, more interfaces and with that, 
a large variety of systems and technologies. 

*SDLB* comes with a large set of connectors out-of-the-box with the addition of 

> [Airbyte](https://airbyte.com/) connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Airbyte](https://airbyte.com/connectors?connector-type=Sources) source connectors.
```

It supports [constraints](../../docs/reference/dataQuality#constraints) and 
[expectations](../../docs/reference/dataQuality#expectations)
that are evaluated each time a pipeline is executed instead of having downstream checks after the execution.

*SDLB* also gathers metrics with every run.
With the metrics gathered, you can detect anomalies like number of records or bytes written.
These are often helpful in finding latent problems in your data pipeline.

### Schema enforcement
As another aspect of quality, you expect your source system to adhere to the agreed interface.

*SDLB* supports schema validation for all its data objects.
In your configuration, you can (optionally) define a schema and enforce it.
This saves you from surprises if an upstream system suddenly changes the schema of a data object you use.

### Lineage
To provide transparency about the origin and transformations of data in your Data Product,
a lineage diagram can greatly help.

*SDLB* is a metadata driven framework. 
You define Data Objects, you define Actions between them. That's it.
SDLB will figure out the dependencies at runtime but they can also be easily displayed from static configurations.

> This is done i.e. in our [sdl-visualization](https://github.com/smart-data-lake/sdl-visualization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done i.e. in our [sdl-visualization](https://github.com/smart-data-lake/sdl-visualization), see also the [UI-Demo](https://ui-demo.smartdatalake.ch/).
```

SDL configuration files can be easily displayed and analyzed. 
This provides the needed transparency of a Data Product. 

### Interfaces
*SDLB* offers many standard Data Objects for all kinds of interfaces.
With the declarative approach and schema enforcement, you can make sure that your data always adheres to the
defined interface specification.

> Often in Cloud Environments, we work with Delta Tables today. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often in Cloud Environments, we work with Delta or Iceberg Tables today. 
```

> Together with [Delta Sharing](https://delta.io/sharing/), you have a powerful tool to share your Data Product
> with an open standard, even in multicloud deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These open standards are a powerful tool to share your Data Product, even in multicloud deployments.
```

## Self-Serve infrastructure platform
_Data infrastructure is designed to be self-serve, enabling teams to access and manage their data autonomously without 
relying on central data teams._

### Mobilize more developers
With increased usage of the Mesh, you need more developers in your domain teams building Data Products.

*SDLB* has an easy to learn, declarative approach that new users can learn quickly.
It supports SQL, Scala and Python for the definition of transformations so your developers can still
use the language they are most comfortable in.
Complex logic and transformations like historization and deduplication are either built-in or can be extended 
in a generic way so your developers can leverage them easily.

### Support your domain teams
The self-serve infrastructure should support your domain team to quickly build new Data Products.

*SDLB* is ideal to integrate into DevOps pipelines as all configurations are written in textfile based HOCON format.
Even if you have custom code, it will be written in SQL, Scala or Python which also integrates well
in any existing DevOps environments. 

> With the right templates, your domain teams can set up new Data Products quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is designed to support code reviews, automated testing and deployment.
With the right templates, your domain teams can set up new Data Products quickly.
```

## Federated governance
_Governance of data and its quality is distributed across domains, with a focus on collaboration, standardized practices, 
and federated decision-making processes to maintain data integrity and trust._

While many of the concepts for a federated governance are on an organizational level and not on a technical level, 
*SDLB* can again help on various points.

### Data Catalogs
When it comes to Data Catalogs, there is no open, agreed upon standard (yet). 

*SDLB*'s configuration files are open and can be visualized as mentioned before.
The concepts of Data Objects and Actions are very similar to many Data Catalog notations and 
with that, they also integrate nicely in existing solutions. 
There is i.e. an exporter to [Apache Atlas](https://atlas.apache.org/#/) which also builds the basis of 
[Azure Purview](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/purview).

### Encryption

> One of aspect with increasing importance is privacy and compliance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One aspect with increasing importance is privacy and compliance. 
```

> For these topics, it helps ot have a unified, generic implementation to prevent your domain teams to each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these topics, it helps to have a unified, generic implementation to prevent your domain teams to each
```
